Of course.
We're back on.
Okay.
Round two.
We talked about affection.
Let me tell you the title of my book.
The title of my book is A Gentle Madness.
Did I tell you that title?
I derived that from a characterization Isaiah Thomas' grandson made.
after his death, my grandfather was afflicted with the gentlest of infirmities.
He was a bibliomaniac.
I mentioned that to Colin Franklin.
He said, I think you should call it the gentlest of infirmities.
I said, that's British.
I said, Americans understand.
Well, clearly I'm writing about the passion, and I would say after 30, close to 30 years of the book trade, you have seen a lot of
Yes, I would not characterize it.
I would not.
I'm not one to object to other people's titles.
I have no problem with your title.
I haven't found it.
I think the word gentle is... Well, it's an oxymoron answer.
And I don't think of it in those ways.
It's...
There's nothing gentle about it from the booksellers' point of view, from the collectors' point of view.
I have met, and I am very fond of my collectors, they sustain my every, and I of course lump the libraries in as well, they sustain my every moment, financially and emotionally.
I have met one collector in my life who has earned my unqualified respect.
One.
His life was totally sustained and enriched by the books he collected and read.
And although he was an extremely private and shy and withdrawn man, he was one of the great monologuists that I have ever met.
Monologuist.
Yes.
And if given the opportunity to discuss or talk about some book or literary person or poet or film,
that his interlocutor and he had experienced in common, he would repay to that person with his monologue and with his knowledge and information.
And he was not an academic or a scholar.
He would repay the
He would share that which he had won for himself by his commitment.
And he spent his whole life collecting secretly, quietly.
He worked in the U.S.
Post Office in Portland, Oregon.
He, for a long time, made no more than $4,000 or $5,000 a year.
He never made, I'm sure he never made more than $12,000 a year.
This isn't the guy down in L.A., is it?
No, in Portland.
Oh, yes, no, I remember that, but I had nothing.
That was a mad acquisitor.
This was a serious book collector who smelled every book he bought, who didn't collect the major writers, who got rid of a writer he didn't like, couldn't stand the influence of Carlos Williams and Charles Olson on modern poetry, and therefore wouldn't have them in the house, and so on.
He ended up with eight or nine or 10 or 12,000 books.
Oh, that's a nice, manageable point.
In a one-room apartment, and they were all fine.
They were almost all 20th century, although his favorite poet was the Bronte sisters.
Is this the person you can identify?
His name was Fred Oral Jacobson.
He died of cancer a couple of years ago.
Fred?
Fred Jacobson.
He is the only person whose life was utterly sustained by books and who took no commercial interest in nor sought commercial benefit from the labors of his acquisition from his collecting, and who for years threatened to leave his books to Portland Public Library because that's where he learned to read, and that's where he was wakened to books.
He did not, in fact, leave them to the Portland Public Library.
He left them to his niece and to Artis Kennelly, a writer friend.
Could you spell that name for me?
Artis is A-R-D-Y-T-H-K-E-N-N-A-L-L-Y, or K-E-L-L-Y.
He's a well-known Portland writer.
But what he said he wanted to do was to give the books to Peter Howard and Charlie Selyazicki and Bob Hoyt, his three book friends, but he didn't put that into his will.
So... You mean give, or are you concerned?
Give.
So I, Peter Howard, had to solve that problem of books, and I managed to solve it.
And, in fact, managed... How did you solve it?
I appraised the library.
As it turned out,
Fred wanted Artis and his niece to have the books they wanted.
He didn't want them to have the money from the books that they wanted.
Great story.
But the niece and Artis wanted the money, and so what I did was appraise the library at their request and get the money divided up amongst the niece and Artis, Kenley, and Bob Hoyt.
And then I bought the library, and I gave half of it to my friend Charlie Celuzicki, so that all of... Did you spell that name for the last guy?
Charles Celuzicki, S-E-L-U-Z-I-C-K-I.
And where is he from?
He's in Portland now, via Baltimore and Salem.
So that all of Fred's... This was a classic problem caused by books.
A classic.
So that, in fact, all of Fred's desires were accommodated.
Meredith and his niece and Bob Hoyt
got the books of their choice from the library or the benefit they were from, and Bob Hoyt, Peter Howard, and Charlie Selyazicki equally, or Bob Hoyt got all the books he wanted, and then Charlie Selyazicki and Peter Howard, both of whom he knew to be booksellers, divided the books equally, all that remained, and instead of getting them for free, they got them at a wholesale price and were able to recirculate the books.
None of the books were such that they
The books were all 20th century books and didn't need to stay together since the only thing that kept them together was Fred's imposing intelligence and his needs.
Well, can you describe the character, if you can, briefly, the collection of the characters?
The books were simply all of the poets of the 20th century whom Fred respected in the best possible condition that he could find, in the best possible condition.
It's just that he had checked out every minor poet in the 20th century, English and American.
And so in one place were books of modest value but of extreme scarcity, and particularly in the condition exhibited.
And although Fred smoked for 25 years, and it killed him, and the spines of all the dust jackets were tinged with tobacco smoke to some degree or other, nevertheless, the books were still in fine condition.
And he similarly explored prose so that he had collection after collection after collection of short stories and also the novels of writers who are not systematically attended to by dealers whose knowledge hasn't extended that penetratingly into our literature.
Fred was the living exponent of the certainty that our literature is composed of more than the one or two hundred authors investigated by most dealers.
And so there would invariably pop up books that none of us were familiar with, which then... He would tell you the things that he... Oh, he would never tell us ever what he was looking for.
I mean, it was a rare day in hell when Fred would...
let it be known that he was looking for any particular book, and when one day one of his friends found his list of books wanted and published in the A.B., it ruptured their relationship for many years.
This happened?
Yes.
For many years.
Was he that well-known a collective?
No, but Fred was incensed that his privacy should be violated.
How did that happen?
Well, his book friend found his want list and published in the A.B.
Oh, I see it as a search thing.
A purported friend.
No, he was, in fact, a dear friend.
He just made an error.
But when Fred would tell you that he was looking for Catherine Bush's Don't Ever Leave Me, which he only found without a jacket in his last year of life,
It would waken you to the fact that there was a writer known as Catherine Brush.
How do you spell her name?
B-R-U-S-H.
Catherine with a K or a C. K. And then, of course, one would look for that book and discover Catherine Brush.
That's wonderful.
And actually find out that Catherine Brush wrote a dozen books, but that Fred only wanted one.
And then, of course, the burden was to find out why he wanted it.
Did you ever sit down with Fred and talk about how this came?
Oh, of course.
Of course, but he was not one to talk about the books that he still needed.
Not the books so much, but the development of the... Fred loved cats and would be the last to go to sleep.
There was no way that Fred would ever retire.
He had no family other than this?
Basically no family.
So in his last years, he was very close to Old Oregon Bookstore his whole life, Preston McMahon with his basis of operations from a book point of view.
But in the later years, when Charlie Solyzicki moved to Portland, and whenever I would come to Portland, which was a couple times a year, we would all gather at Charlie Solyzicki's house and talk.
And Fred was still talking when the rest of us fell dead.
He was totally sustained by writers and their relationships with each other and with their writing.
He was just one of those people that make it worth living to know him.
Was he a formally educated man?
No.
How did he come to this?
Those are the miracles that
Or for others, too.
Was he an Oregonian?
Yes.
That's wonderful.
I don't have anybody about California for my books.
No.
I can't tell you how wonderful this is.
Fred is.
Fred was only a rumor, even in his own community.
His funeral service was particularly obnoxious.
He had wanted... Did you go to it?
Yes.
Yes, I made a special trip for that.
You didn't tell me when this was?
Thousand miles.
It was a couple of years ago.
And he had wanted, he was a great movie fan, and he collected records in the latter half of his life in the very same way that he collected books.
He sought minor composers.
He sought the imported record.
He sought records in fine condition.
He's the only person I know who systematically collected the popular song in America.
he collected film scores and cast recordings of plays.
To the extent they ended up with almost a thousand cast recordings and film scores.
He had wanted the score of, oh shit, I've just forgotten the film.
But even the minister's memorial address, when it came to book, came to a, and at that time his library had not been dispersed, the principal burden of the minister's address in remembering Fred to his few friends assembled was
Fred was known to have gathered a large number of books and records which were extremely valuable.
And it was a very unpleasing way to say goodbye to Fred.
Particularly because, in fact, the value of the library was quite modest.
I'd pay $42,000 to the library and would be very lucky to get $60,000 or $70,000 out of it in a reasonable time.
But they were the most interesting little library that I've ever had, whereas other libraries, I had bought a Faulkner collection a few months before for $445,000.
And that was actually another collector sustained by books.
I've interviewed this gentleman, by the way.
inwardly focusing manner of focusing on one author, he in fact was, as well as the same, simply a library in which there are 10,000 authors instead of one, is ultimately going to please more people in.
Well, in the marketplace, perhaps, please more people.
But Peterson's collection certainly is of greater significance as an archive, I think.
Except that it's no longer an archive.
I totally believed in the notion of a bookseller as a conduit, rather than as a focal point.
And the bookseller's responsibility is simply to move the items along, whether they're newly discovered or not newly discovered.
And so the glory need not center in the bookseller.
I have
a modest opinion of what booksellers do.
It's just that there aren't enough of them, although many people feel that there are too many at all times.
There are huge areas in the world where there are no booksellers, including the United States, Knoxville, Tennessee, twice the size of Berkeley.
I broke down there once and had, all of a Saturday, a perfect bookseller day to go to the local youth bookstores.
could not find a single second-hand bookstore to go to and never left the automobile dealer's premises in a town like the size of Berkeley, which has more than 50 bookstores people selling an antiquarian book.
So when one realizes that, one realizes what a haphazard profession of bookselling is.
You can put all the antiquarian book dealers in the state of Florida
I covered half of them in four days.
Right.
Well, how do you, I mean, you mentioned, without mentioning Carl Peterson's name, but I interviewed Carl, and I've been with him in St.
Louis last month, and he mentioned you and Marty Cole with great respect and affection.
I wonder,
Do you think that Peterson, he said that he would like to have seen it remain as a collection, but then where so much of it was printed books, how did you feel about that?
Do you think that should have remained as a collection?
You mentioned one of your functions as being a clundler.
Would you have preferred to have been a clundler for that collection as a collection rather than the way it is now being sold?
These are the questions that conflict with the practicalities of life and of being a bookseller, and if your idea to say precedes, you get into trouble.
The bookseller's necessary function and almost certainly the first thing, the first responsibility is to survive and to continue.
although violating the integrity of anything, it's very high up on things not to do.
Here he's spent his whole life, and I know actually that Carl is feeling quite sour lately.
At one point, it was almost measurable.
He played me as Margaret Cohn tapes, Michael.
At some point, Carl himself
ceased thinking of his collection as a book collection and started thinking about it as a retirement fund.
And I'm certain that this idea cost him as much stress as it did pleasure.
Of course I would have been honored to be able to have kept it together.
I initially plotted to
sell it the day after I bought it for a modest percentage but a serious dollar profit to the most likely customer, a customer who, one, I was certain to afford it, two, I was selling it through a dealer with whom I got along famously and who represented this person.
And although I thought this person, I had nothing but dislike for the ultimate customer in this instance, and
This was a similar experience of every one of my colleagues' periods, with the one exception of the intermediary, who was probably more tolerant than us, and consequently could get along with such a person.
It was my intention to sell it intact the day after I bought it, and simply move it across town, the same town.
You were talking about Brodsky?
Brodsky.
And I felt at the time that the price was that I wanted.
I mean, I had negotiated a price out of Peterson.
You didn't tell me this, though.
That's very interesting.
I had negotiated a price out of Peterson.
I spent a day with Braski.
Why didn't he tell me this?
He may not have known it.
The circumstances of my acquiring the Carl Peterson collection are extremely complex, and yet they themselves are a history of the book trade as I know it, from my point of view.
Carl's dealer was Margie.
Carl is a classic example of how I function in the book business, and how I think could booksellers function.
Carl was a Faulkner collector by dedication, commitment, and interest.
And although there were other collectors before, notably Linton Massey, and other collectors after, notably Carter Burden, and Brodsky after.
and notably collectors simultaneous, the most important of which was Toby Holtzman, Carl, by virtue of every quality of human being that we can denominate, deserved the Faulkner.
He was more appreciative, he was more rigorous, he was more discerning, and yet he was the poorest, by far.
Recognizing that, his best dealer, Margie, gave him first crack at all for him.
I believe all.
She loved him.
He played him.
They had a personal relationship.
She was much his senior.
They had a very close personal relationship.
He was her closest friend.
And as a consequence of having a good book dealer and a friend, Carl built the best collection in the United States.
aside possibly from Virginia and certain institutional collections, and then Brodsky got in to the family and came away with a hundred presentation copies and a lot of letters, but nevertheless, Carl had the best bibliographical collection and the best condition collection, and he was ahead of everyone else with regard to knowledge, and he himself dug some very interesting things out.
I inherited the relationship when Margie died in that I was the second most consistent supplier, and I had a similar attitude that he should have the book at the
friendliest price, and that he should have it rather than someone else.
And I was capable, although he was not the beneficiary of the screen material that I had turned up over the years, I had turned up a significant quantity of Faulkner screen material, which went elsewhere.
Carl wasn't for some reason as fond of that, or it was a little too expensive for him, or whatever.
But in any case, I inherited the relationship.
When it came time to market his collection, he first went to his oldest
bookselling connections, then living, which was Colophon Books, and it was his insistence that the collection remained together intact and be sold only to an American institution.
And he gave Colophon a year to do that, and Colophon simply failed to do that.
So I, in inheriting the opportunity to sell his collection, inherited that situation that had already been on the market for a year with no takers.
It was then Carl's intention, if I did not buy it,
to send it to Sotheby's and break it up.
And that was going to be the end of the discussion.
In fact, that was a hammer over my head that he made quite clear that if I did not buy it, he would send it to auction.
I would certainly make every effort to buy in order to keep any other bookseller from having it.
I felt that I was as close to Carl as any other bookseller, and I'm certain that's true in terms of being somebody he would trust to sell his collection to, in terms of the terms or whatever.
And so I knew that I had to buy the collection.
The next step was to find out how much it was.
The price had been slowly rising over the years.
And after a long and friendly dinner and such, we negotiated a handshake price while we were walking through the middle of Chicago in the dead of night.
And the price was $445,000 half down and half in one year.
And I subsequently involved three of my friends in this transaction to the extent that my principal partner in the matter put up the same amount of money as I, which was exactly one-half, or 51%, and others came in for the other 49%.
And the half down was paid by the others, so the principal mover and his principal partner didn't have to come up with a dime for the first year.
That's very clever.
And it was my intention to sell the collection the next day after I bought it and walk away with a couple hundred thousand dollars profit, which I would make 50 or so, and my friend would make 50.
And if that didn't work, we had a year to affect something else.
Well, it didn't work, as it happened.
Brodsky was going through a divorce, which I had no knowledge of.
And he and his dealer weren't seen buying the collection for $670,000, which was my price.
So, I determined that the next responsible thing that I had to do was to catalog the collection properly.
I had Carl's catalogue of his own collection, and there were editions, of course.
However, his catalogue, although a very useful bibliographical guide, was singularly unforthcoming about the nature of materials inside.
Singularly.
And I had to determine at that point, having committed $445,000 of my and my friends' money, what their books were worth.
And to do that, one simply had the catalogue in.
properly.
And because there is no way you can catalog a copy of Mosquitoes for $18,000 without saying why it's $18,000 and another copy in the same collection is only $3,000.
And there's no way of saying why a letter to a friend is worth
$12,500 until you explore the nature of the relationship of Faulkner and the recipient of the letter and what the letter says.
But Carl only says letter to a friend, whereas it was something rather more than that.
So his catalog required, the books that are in his catalog required different kinds of descriptions, and I spent a thousand hours of my own time
after 9 to 5, Catalonia and Spokane.
Well, that took a year and a half.
All of a sudden, $50,000 is not a lot of money.
I actually may have only made $17,500 so far for a thousand hours' work.
And then in addition to seeing that I had to describe the items accurately, I realized that I needed to
Since I was involved in bibliographical description and relationships one to another in a bibliographical sense, I had to impose on his collection a somewhat different bibliographical structure, which I did.
And that took an immense amount of time getting it right on its own terms.
So that the catalog that I have done and I have polished, but which I have not yet printed, because I haven't yet determined how I want to print it,
whether as a book or as a free catalog or as both.
I would like to either purchase or get a copy.
I have computer printouts, but that's it.
I now have them at the Boston Book Fair, but I don't have anything to give away.
If somebody sends me $50, I maybe would get a copy of you off.
In the meantime, so I have, after now at least a year and a half, completed the catalog and I'm trying to figure out how to print it, whether as a book for sale or as a free catalog or both.
In the interim, however, we have at the same time attempted to sell the books in the catalog or as many as we can do the most likely places.
One of the reasons I took Jeff Marks for a partner in this was that he had customers.
People often have customers who are not shared.
And as it turned out, we had two serious private customers, actually three or four private customers and a couple of institutions, and I have managed, we have managed, to sell $607,000 of the Faulkner book.
And everybody who had to pony up money in order to acquire the books
gotten their money back.
After one year, they all had exactly what they put in back.
And after a year and three months, they had a 25% profit, including myself.
And my money was only out for three months.
So in terms of financial dealings, it was a modestly successful proposition.
In terms of the work involved, I put 1,000 hours in.
And I may be repaid for that by selling the catalog or future glory or future profits.
then we have 75% or 80% of the books remaining, and they hold maybe 50% of the value.
So there's additional profits to be guarded in the future without the burden of being forced to sell them because we have our money back plus.
So I'm in a comfortable situation of having a vast stock of Faulkner, albeit much of it with no apparent customer, i.e.
translations into foreign languages of books.
They're not easily or readily sold, particularly for $60, $70, or $80.
But then, nevertheless, they have a great deal of integrity.
And so the notion of keeping a collection together, all the time which I was... We held the collection, I bought it on July 6th of 88, and we did not deliver a book until
May 1st of 89, during which time we allowed ourselves six or seven months to sell a collection as a whole.
But selling a collection as a whole involved having a proper catalog of the collection, and involving the proper catalog of the collection took a year and a half.
And so such cataloging and such of Carl's work as was available to any prospective buyer was always available to any prospective buyer.
so that anybody could or any institution could have bought a collection for a period of about seven or eight months.
However, we did not wholly dedicate our, just a full-time lawyer, and I have run a full-time business with a $40,000 a month overhead.
We were not dedicating ourselves solely to hauling a Faulkner catalog from door to door the world over in order to sell it, and I don't believe that I would have been successful had I done that.
And so the economics of the transaction prevented us from selling it intact.
One of the great modern phenomenon, or possibly not only modern, is taking a collection and breaking it, or finding a customer and building a collection.
And there are no rules in either case.
is happy to supply books to someone who's building, or one is happy to buy it after its building to carve it up again.
And I would think that I have no idea of what percentage of collections built to stay together, but my guess is that not a lot.
Institutions are not in the practice of buying
especially modern author collections.
Perfectly, a perfect example.
Many collections are given, but most of the people that ordinary booksellers deal with are not mortals that inhabit the street in which books are bought and then given away.
I think a perfect example of this, of a dilemma, is Carter Britton's collection.
Bob Nykirk, who I interviewed a year ago, who's now since died, said, you know,
He had talked about maybe the New York Public Library would be a home for this.
He said, you know, they've got 90% of what he's got.
I mean... Right.
There certainly are some wonderful gems in there that they'd like to have.
The Carter Burden phenomenon is an entirely different book story.
Talk about that, please.
I've interviewed Carter.
Carter's subject as a phenomenon.
Well, it was an interesting phenomenon, and it caused a lot of...
It brought a great deal of benefit to the book trade.
I think the benefit far outweighed its subsequent disadvantages, and it brought a considerable amount of grief.
The phenomenon is the most interesting part about it, and the fact that it went more or less unfulfilled is only the story of human, not frailty, but
the lack of harmony between the world's anticipations and beliefs and the capacity of an individual.
The notion, as I understood it or articulated, even if Carter didn't, was a very simple one, that Carter had set up about collecting all of American literature
from Mark Twain on.
Basically from Waller Barrett on.
He overlaps with Waller Barrett slightly, but he collected more or less in the same style as Waller Barrett.
He collected the primary editions, he collected significant inscribed and bibliographical editions, and he collected representative, possibly representative, autograph material, although that was certainly not a focus.
The joy was that Carter wanted one of every book by every serious American author
And he inhabited science fiction, where he really got screwed, and all other fields where he really got the finest treatment in the world from the best dealers around.
Everything gets screwed.
The New York Public Library has that now, and they think that's wonderful.
Well, we'll just drop the word, screwed, then.
But perhaps you could say it in another way.
What do you mean by that?
Possibly not.
We'll retract that.
He built a collection of modern science fiction, which was possibly not his best collection.
You think maybe that's why it now has a whole... Well, he never had the heart for science fiction.
They weren't books he necessarily was interested in or understood.
He only collected one aspect of them, and he may not have gotten consistently fine copies at consistently fair prices.
The general notion, however, is that he was going to collect all of American literature, one each.
What did you think when you heard that?
Well, that he ever articulated it in that way.
In fact, Carter would not articulate anything to me or to anyone else.
He was receptive.
When it was understood that he would collect an author, then if we offered him a book that he didn't have, he was generally appreciative and he ordered it.
I was introduced to him by Margie Cohn, who I was certainly much beloved by Margie, and I deeply cared for Margie, and she was my mentor number one, one that I'll go down with.
She brought him around on his arm and introduced him to me, and I had just acquired Toby Holtzman's collections not long.
Toby was way ahead of Carter in terms of time.
and wisdom in some ways.
Toby's an extremely hard-headed collector in that even though he was a man of means, he was not going to pay too much for books.
I don't know Toby.
And he didn't.
Well, Toby's another highly concerned person.
I'll talk about Toby later on.
I had bought a hundred author collections from Toby.
He also collected American literature.
Let's stick with Carter.
Carter was into far bigger ideas than that.
So the idea was simple.
He was going to collect one each of American authors.
Who the American author should be was up in the air, and I'm certain that Diler provided him with many authors, out of some sense of self-advantage, of course.
Let me interrupt.
But, from my point of view,
Carter did exactly the right thing, he could have gone further.
And he was extremely well served by the trade.
And he began systematically acquiring fine copies and proof copies and inscribed copies of American literature from when he decided the starting point would be.
And I think he decided the starting point would be from that period when he still could get
the best stuff, and it was perfectly clear that he could no longer get the best stuff for Melville.
It was possible to get it for Howells, and it was possible to get it for Twain, remarkably enough, but basically he started with Twain.
He simply, and in ten years, and however many millions, none of us calculated accurately how many millions, maybe ten million, maybe twenty million.
I doubt it was more than twenty million.
The fact is, there are several remarkable facts.
One, he built a fabulous collection.
Two, it could be done, and it was done.
And he got the greatest and rarest books that ever were instantly, simply because it was known that he could afford to pay for them.
This lights up books of his eyes like nothing.
And after a while,
He got the services of the three or four dealers most capable of dealing in those books in a penetrating way and most capable of carrying him.
He named for me three dealers.
Well, there was Glenn Horowitz and Ralph Sipper, Joseph's provider, and Serendipity Books.
But those people harvested the rest of the world.
I mean, those books didn't just get born in the cellars of those booksellers.
Those books had to come from somewhere.
So the fact is that it involved the whole of the book world.
Everyone in the book world supplied those books and were repaid in kind.
Now, there were... Did he add some books, the market?
Well, only superficially.
The notion that anybody was sticking it to Carter was a silly one.
First of all, he could be theorized to have the capacity to say no.
He had the appearance of being trusting and not gullible, but simply trusting people.
There were numerous problems.
The problems would begin when, first of all, it all started with he on Margie's arm, and Margie wanted 10%, and he wanted to get out of that.
But he realized that Margie couldn't possibly handle the volume of his desire.
So that quickly ended rancorously.
It ended, among other things, in a lawsuit, which Margie won for failure to pay.
There came a time when Carter would order books from individual small booksellers and not pay them.
And to this day he has not, I'm certain, paid Jeff Marks for books that he bought from Jeff, and this effectively cut him off from those dealers.
They could not afford, even if they wanted to, and I don't think that many people wanted to sell Carter books.
What kind of rationale would he have for not paying for books?
This was the great mystery that none of us could understand, and Carter was unprompt and
arbitrary about whom he paid and when, and this effectively reduced his relationships to the three dealers mentioned, who, it may be said, had personal relationships with him, i.e., they had dined with him, been welcomed into his home.
There was never a face-to-face, you're going to pay me, aren't you, or this, but there was an implicit understanding that one would be paid.
The problems that
The problems invariably involved money.
The problems were, how could this man of apparent unlimited wealth not pay his bills and not pay them on time?
And so Carter's, but all of us had a piece of the elephant, and who knows what the elephant was or was like or is?
None of us knew, and to this day I'm absolutely certain none of us do.
I'm not certain that Carter knows, but it's presumptuous for me to even
begin to discuss something of that nature.
The fact is that people progressively were less and less swiftly paid.
This reduced his relationships, but not his effectiveness in acquiring books, to the three booksellers in question.
The three booksellers in question are fabulously gifted booksellers and unbelievably faithful and loyal booksellers, unlike many.
so that we were committed to our collector, we also understood the long-range financial benefits.
I would not have my little half-million-dollar building if Carter Burden had not existed, although Carter hardly contributed half-million-dollar profit to my business.
But the fact is I would not have that building, which is redefining my life if it hadn't been for Carter.
I have nothing bad to say about Carter.
What happened was that there then became this notion that I, say, would articulate in this manner that
that the booksellers felt that this was, in fact, what Carter was doing.
He was collecting all of American literature, and therefore all of American literature would be made available to him.
And all of American literature was made available to him.
And he bought it, up to the point where he stopped buying it.
And none of us have a clue as to why he stopped buying it, or why he stopped collecting.
It seems inconceivable that it was money that stopped him from buying it.
He said the West.
He had a television station that was in trouble.
He's in the media business.
Maybe he was minus 20 million on a television station.
But that... All the stuff is in storage now, you know.
All of the stuff is not in storage.
The... So... It's not?
No.
So...
A lot of us.
He had been introduced to me as having previously been a book collector by Margie, and then he had started collecting paintings, and then it became clear that he would sell paintings for a serious profit when it was to his advantage, and so on.
What seemed quite clear is that he had trouble managing his assets to enable him to collect books in the way that he had imagined, or we had imagined he was, in fact.
My guess is that he grew into
the idea that I have articulated that he would be the cluster of all of modern literature and what he would do with it was his business.
What does it matter what he would do with it?
Give it away.
It doesn't matter.
He could afford to do it.
The notion was that he could afford to do it.
And if he could not afford to continue doing it, then he ought at least to have the moral courage and ability to tell his people that, possibly in advance, so that he would not be sticking people with serious skills, which he did do.
To what extent Glenn Horowitz was negative, Cass was, since Glenn became ultimately the principal dealer and the single conduit.
Then, after a while, you realize that he, well, the science fiction collection had been given away.
I appraised it because I hadn't sold as much of it to him, and I appraised it on a strictly formulaic basis.
And I appraised it for cost plus cost of living.
And that was simply that, and they gave it away for cost plus cost of living.
Well, what did you appraise it as?
Well, whatever that ended up to be, cost plus cost of living.
Do you remember what that figure was?
I don't remember off the top of my head, and I should think it would be a total violation of confidence for me to remember.
You can't believe me harassing me.
So, you know, whatever I appraised it for, it was, it was, it was not at a, well, it's value now, and it's not relevant.
I think it's fair to say that Carter didn't give it away in order to make a profit.
Then, all of a sudden, one would see on the market his Anglo-American poets, namely first Auden, then Eliot.
And then you realize that the idea was fractured, and that the books were going right back into the marketplace, probably to settle bills.
And in fact,
Ralph had a significant bill with Carter which was sold by consigning books, and I have no notion of the degree to which Glenn is having his bills paid by the consignment of books, but my guess is that that is exactly what is happening.
And not only did he get his Eliot collection, but suddenly he got his Marianne Moore collection, which is a strictly American poet, so there went the notion that his poetry collection was still intact.
So then, on those principles, almost anything is subject to being, and then he had sold his Edgar Rice Burroughs collection, and I believe, not his bomb collection, but he certainly had sold his Edgar Rice Burroughs collection as something that was certainly one end of his science fiction function.
So the idea was fractured, and Carter was no longer perceived to be a buying, and so he was no longer
even worth mentioning as a viable ongoing, since booksellers are totally committed to tomorrow, then barely interested in the past, except for the more scully and responsible ones, and today is only a way in which to get to tomorrow.
They're deeply interested in tomorrow.
So Carter was not in their tomorrows in that regard.
In the meantime, however, he had put...
Let's call it $10 million into the modern first edition book trade.
Well, the modern first edition book trade, no single dealer lives on more than $20,000 a year.
My guess is less.
And so that money was a free-floating cannonball.
It's still out there.
What did you say?
$20,000?
Yes, all booksellers live on less than $20,000 on the whole, on the average less.
So all that money that he put out there is still rocketing around the trade.
It's still out there sustaining the modern persuasion trade.
In fact, it's very safe to say that he gave it, it's not immortality, he gave it 10 or 20 or 30 years more life, guaranteed life, that is, by the injection of this money into the trade, because the money is still there.
This was of inestimable benefit to the trade, and the trade ought to be extremely thankful, and I, for one, certainly am.
You don't see him as a viable player now, though?
Well, I don't know him to have bought a book in recent time, if he... And if he did, he... Well, who would know?
Who would know?
It was Glenn that bought what Glenn bought.
And I couldn't, since I knew, we all have a record of what Carter has, down to the last itty-bitty look.
I didn't perceive that he specifically was buying any Faulkner through Glenn.
This was... But he may well have.
Fine.
I'm happy that he did.
If he couldn't pay odds,
In the end, then it must be a structural problem for Glenn to solve if he presumably can also pay Glenn.
Therefore, Glenn has to get books on trade.
I do a lot of that structural manipulation in order to make it possible for customers to have books.
By taking other books and consignment and keeping records, it can be hairy if you are challenged and you haven't kept proper records.
And it's extremely burdensome, time-consuming, and expensive to keep proper records.
It involves elaborate bookkeeping, and I'm very good at doing that.
But I know what's involved, and if Carter is buying quantities of books to Glenn and paying Glenn with consignments, there's an immense amount of trust required and good faith.
And it's very difficult for collectors to have that all over the map, so it's probably quite...
effective and useful for Carter to center his energies through a given bookseller who then administers the problems.
So I have pretty much nothing but fond memories for the recent phenomenon of Carter Burden, but he's no longer an important, at one point he was more than 25% of my accounts receivable, which I think banks are inclined to tell you is a bad thing.
And if suddenly the fear of non-payment arises, we can have uncomfortable nights.
But in truth and in memory, the phenomenon of Carter Burden was a wonderful thing for the trade.
There's always been these perpetual questions on our lips.
What happens if somebody gets into the, as a dealer, gets into the trade with a lot of money?
Because none of us have a lot of money, he can...
dominate and control.
Well, the only time that somebody got into the manifestation business with a reasonably large sum of money, vast compared with the rest of us, that did not happen.
And the one time that one collector with an apparently unlimited sum of money got into buying books that are very inexpensive, he got the books.
He got them all.
They left him